Add docs on critical nodes endpoint for v23.1 (#16914)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v23.1/monitoring-and-alerting.md

When storage of time-series metrics is disabled, the DB Console Metrics dashboards in the DB Console are still available, but their visualizations are blank. This is because the dashboards rely on data that is no longer available.

### Critical nodes endpoint

The critical nodes status endpoint is used to:

> - Check if any of your nodes are critical.  A node is 'critical' if that node becoming unreachable would cause [replicas to become unavailable](ui-cluster-overview-page.html#replication-status).

Reviewer: Nit: This description is perfectly understandable, but it's somewhat vague whether "critical" is a state that a node is in (can a node go in and out of being critical?), or designation that it has (can a node critical 4 life?). I'd blindly assume the former, in which case I'd suggest something like "Check if any of your nodes are in a critical state".

(Italicizing per our style on introducing new terms)

```suggestion
- Check if any of your nodes are critical. A node is _critical_ if that node becoming unreachable would cause [replicas to become unavailable](ui-cluster-overview-page.html#replication-status).
```

Author: updated with your suggestion re: "in a critical state", and used the italics - thanks!

> - Check if any of your nodes are in a critical state.  A node is _critical_ if that node becoming unreachable would cause [replicas to become unavailable](ui-cluster-overview-page.html#replication-status).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if any of your nodes is in a critical state. A node is _critical_ if that node becoming unreachable would cause [replicas to become unavailable](ui-cluster-overview-page.html#replication-status).
```

- Check if any ranges are [under-replicated or unavailable](ui-cluster-overview-page.html#replication-status). This is useful when determining whether a node is ready for [decommissioning](node-shutdown.html#decommissioning).

> - Check if any of your cluster's data placement constraints (set via [Multiregion SQL](multiregion-overview.html) or direct [configuration of replication zones](configure-replication-zones.html)) are being violated. This is useful when implementing [data domiciling](data-domiciling.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if any of your cluster's data placement constraints (set via [multi-region SQL](multiregion-overview.html) or direct [configuration of replication zones](configure-replication-zones.html)) are being violated. This is useful when implementing [data domiciling](data-domiciling.html).
```

Author: I'm trying to make ~fetch~ "multiregion" happen but this is ok! updated! :-)

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}

> This status endpoint supersedes the deprecated [Replication Reports](query-replication-reports.html) SQL API.

Reviewer: Nit: Is "SQL API" necessary here? I always get confused about when we actually refer to an official "API". Based on the link, it looks like this just refers to some system tables?

Also, what does it technically mean that the status endpoint supersedes the Replication Reports? Is the returned info more accurate, or is it more that we recommend the former over the latter?

EDIT: I see from the next article that it's the former, due to architectural changes, so it's probably worth stating that here as well.

Author: everything is an API!!!1!  SQL is just another thing to program against.  I'm not sure if it's necessary to call it that but I wanted to contrast it to this thing, which is an HTTP API.  I updated this a little to say this is an "HTTP" thing vs that which is a "SQL" thing

updated to say

> This HTTP status endpoint supersedes the deprecated [Replication Reports](query-replication-reports.html) SQL API. Due to architectural changes in CockroachDB, the SQL queries described on that page will not result in correct output.

{{site.data.alerts.end}}

#### Fields

The JSON object returned by the critical nodes status endpoint contains the following top-level fields.

| Field                         | Description                                                                                                  |
|-------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `criticalNodes`               | A list of nodes that are critical. Critical nodes are not safe to terminate because data loss could occur.   |

> | `report.overReplicated`       | A list of ranges that are overreplicated vs. your [zone config settings](configure-replication-zones.html).  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `report.overReplicated`       | A list of ranges that are over-replicated versus your [zone config settings](configure-replication-zones.html).  |
```

Author: Fixed!

| `report.violatingConstraints` | A list of ranges that are in violation of your [zone config settings](configure-replication-zones.html).     |
| `report.unavailable`          | A list of ranges that are unavailable.                                                                       |
| `report.unavailableNodeIds`   | A list of node IDs with unavailable ranges.                                                                  |

> | `report.underReplicated`      | A list of ranges that are underreplicated vs. your [zone config settings](configure-replication-zones.html). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `report.underReplicated`      | A list of ranges that are under-replicated versus your [zone config settings](configure-replication-zones.html). |
```

Author: Fixed!

> The `criticalNodes` portion of the response contains a (possibly empty) list of objects, each of which have the following fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `criticalNodes` portion of the response contains a (possibly empty) list of objects, each of which has the following fields.
```

Author: MUH GRAMMMARRRRRRRRRRRRR

Fixed :-)

|-----------------+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `nodeId`        | `2`                     | The node ID of the critical node.                                                                        |
| `address`       | `{...}`                 | An object representing the network address of the node.                                                  |
| `locality`      | `{...}`                 | An object representing the [locality](cockroach-start.html#locality) of the node.                        |
| `ServerVersion` | `{...}`                 | An object representing the CockroachDB version of the node.                                              |
| `buildTag`      | `"v23.1.0-rc.2"`        | The git build tag of the CockroachDB release of the node.                                                |
| `startedAt`     | `"1683655799845426000"` | The UNIX epoch timestamp at which the node was started.                                                  |

> | `clusterName`   | `""`                    | The [name of the cluster](cockroach-start.html#flags-cluster-name) (if any) the node is associated with. |

Reviewer: For consistency with the preceding row.

```suggestion
| `clusterName`   | `""`                    | The [name of the cluster](cockroach-start.html#flags-cluster-name) (if any) with which the node is associated. |
```

Author: Fixed

| `sqlAddress`    | `{...}`                 | The [network address for SQL connections](cockroach-start.html#flags-sql-addr) to the node.              |
| `httpAddress`   | `{...}`                 | The [address for DB Console HTTP connections](cockroach-start.html#flags-http-addr) to the node.         |

> Each report subtype (e.g., `report.unavailable`, `report.violatingConstraints`, etc.) returns a (possibly empty) list of objects describing the [ranges](architecture/overview.html#architecture-range) that report applies to. Each object contains a `rangeDescriptor` and a `config` that describe the range.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each report subtype (e.g., `report.unavailable`, `report.violatingConstraints`, etc.) returns a (possibly empty) list of objects describing the [ranges](architecture/overview.html#architecture-range) that report applies to. Each object contains a `rangeDescriptor` and a `config` that describes the range.
```

Author: Fixed

| `rangeDescriptor.rangeId`      | `"89"`                                                       | The [range ID](alter-range.html#find-range-id-and-leaseholder-information) this section of the report is referring to.         |
| `rangeDescriptor.startKey`     | `"8okSYW1zdGVyZGFtAAE="`                                     | The [start key for the range](show-ranges.html#start-key).                                                                     |
| `rangeDescriptor.endKey`       | `"8okSYW1zdGVyZGFtAAESszMzMzMzQAD/gAD/AP8A/wD/AP8A/yMAAQ=="` | The [end key for the range](show-ranges.html#end-key).                                                                         |
| `config.rangeMinBytes`         | `134217728`                                                  | The [target minimum size](configure-replication-zones.html#range-min-bytes) for the range.                                       |
| `config.rangeMaxBytes`         | `536870912`                                                  | The [target maximum size](configure-replication-zones.html#range-min-bytes) for the range.                                     |

> | `config.gcPolicy`              | `{...}`                                                      | An object representing the GC settings for the range (e.g. [`gc.ttlseconds`](configure-replication-zones.html#gc-ttlseconds)). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `config.gcPolicy`              | `{...}`                                                      | An object representing the garbage collection settings for the range (e.g., [`gc.ttlseconds`](configure-replication-zones.html#gc-ttlseconds)). |
```

Author: Fixed!

> | `config.gcPolicy`              | `{...}`                                                      | An object representing the garbage collection settings for the range (e.g. [`gc.ttlseconds`](configure-replication-zones.html#gc-ttlseconds)). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `config.gcPolicy`              | `{...}`                                                      | An object representing the garbage collection settings for the range (e.g., [`gc.ttlseconds`](configure-replication-zones.html#gc-ttlseconds)). |
```

| `config.leasePreferences`      | `[...]`                                                      | The [lease preferences](configure-replication-zones.html#lease_preferences) for the range.                                     |
| `config.rangefeedEnabled`      | `false`                                                      | Whether [rangefeeds](create-and-configure-changefeeds.html#enable-rangefeeds) are enabled for this range.                      |
| `config.excludeDataFromBackup` | `false`                                                      | Whether this range's data should be excluded from [backups](backup.html).                                                      |

#### Examples

- [Replication status - normal](#replication-status-normal)
- [Replication status - constraint violation](#replication-status-constraint-violation)
- [Replication status - under-replicated ranges](#replication-status-under-replicated-ranges)
- [Replication status - ranges in critical localities](#replication-status-ranges-in-critical-localities)

##### Replication status - normal

> The following example assumes you are running a fresh, local [`cockroach demo`](cockroach-demo.html) cluster started using the following command:

Reviewer: Nit: Do we need to clarify what "fresh" means? Would it be safer to use "newly started" instead?

Author: Updated here and elsewhere to say "newly started, local ..."

> The following example assumes you are running a newly started, local [`cockroach demo`](cockroach-demo.html) cluster started using the following command:

Reviewer: In case you want to avoid the repetition of "newly started ... started using" maybe "newly started ... created using"? I don't feel super strongly about this.

```suggestion
The following example assumes you are running a newly started, local [`cockroach demo`](cockroach-demo.html) cluster started using the following command:
```

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
cockroach demo --geo-partitioned-replicas --insecure
~~~

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/_status/critical_nodes
~~~

~~~ json
{
  "criticalNodes": [
  ],
  "report": {
    "underReplicated": [
    ],
    "overReplicated": [
    ],
    "violatingConstraints": [
    ],
    "unavailable": [
    ],
    "unavailableNodeIds": [
    ]
  }
}
~~~

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}

> You may have to wait a few minutes after starting the demo cluster before getting the 'all clear' output above. This can happen because it takes time for [replica movement](architecture/replication-layer.html) to occur to meet the constraints given by the [zone configurations](configure-replication-zones.html) set by the [`--geo-partitioned-replicas` flag](cockroach-demo.html#geo-partitioned-replicas).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may have to wait a few minutes after starting the demo cluster before getting the 'all clear' output above. This can happen because it takes time for [replica movement](architecture/replication-layer.html) to occur in order to meet the constraints given by the [zone configurations](configure-replication-zones.html) set by the [`--geo-partitioned-replicas` flag](cockroach-demo.html#geo-partitioned-replicas).
```

Author: Updated!

{{site.data.alerts.end}}

##### Replication status - constraint violation

> The following example assumes you are running a fresh, local [`cockroach demo`](cockroach-demo.html) cluster started using the following command:

Reviewer: Ditto

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
cockroach demo --geo-partitioned-replicas --insecure
~~~

By default, this geo-distributed demo cluster will not have any constraint violations.

> To introduce a violation that we can then query for, we'll modify the [zone configuration](configure-replication-zones.html) of the [`movr.users`](movr.html#the-movr-database) table.

Reviewer: Per our style guide, tweaking to emphasize second-person over first-person in tutorial steps.

```suggestion
To introduce a violation that you can then query for, modify the [zone configuration](configure-replication-zones.html) of the [`movr.users`](movr.html#the-movr-database) table.
```

Author: sorry, never read it :-} 

jkjk 

updated!

> Let's use [`SHOW CREATE TABLE`](show-create.html) to see what existing zone configurations are attached to the `users` table, so we know what to modify.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use [`SHOW CREATE TABLE`](show-create.html) to see what existing zone configurations are attached to the `users` table, so that you know what to modify.
```

Author: updated!

  users      | CREATE TABLE public.users (
             |     id UUID NOT NULL,
             |     city VARCHAR NOT NULL,
             |     name VARCHAR NULL,
             |     address VARCHAR NULL,
             |     credit_card VARCHAR NULL,
             |     CONSTRAINT users_pkey PRIMARY KEY (city ASC, id ASC)
             | ) PARTITION BY LIST (city) (
             |     PARTITION us_west VALUES IN (('seattle'), ('san francisco'), ('los angeles')),
             |     PARTITION us_east VALUES IN (('new york'), ('boston'), ('washington dc')),
             |     PARTITION europe_west VALUES IN (('amsterdam'), ('paris'), ('rome'))
             | );
             | ALTER PARTITION europe_west OF INDEX movr.public.users@users_pkey CONFIGURE ZONE USING
             |     constraints = '[+region=europe-west1]';
             | ALTER PARTITION us_east OF INDEX movr.public.users@users_pkey CONFIGURE ZONE USING
             |     constraints = '[+region=us-east1]';
             | ALTER PARTITION us_west OF INDEX movr.public.users@users_pkey CONFIGURE ZONE USING
             |     constraints = '[+region=us-west1]'
(1 row)
~~~

> To create a constraint violation, let's use the [`ALTER PARTITION`](alter-partition.html) statement to tell the [ranges](architecture/overview.html#architecture-range) in the `europe_west` partition that they are explicitly supposed to *not* be in the `region=europe-west1` locality by issuing the following statement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a constraint violation, use the [`ALTER PARTITION`](alter-partition.html) statement to tell the [ranges](architecture/overview.html#architecture-range) in the `europe_west` partition that they are explicitly supposed to **not** be in the `region=europe-west1` locality:
```

Author: Done

> To create a constraint violation, use the [`ALTER PARTITION`](alter-partition.html) statement to tell the [ranges](architecture/overview.html#architecture-range) in the `europe_west` partition that they are explicitly supposed to *not* be in the `region=europe-west1` locality:

Reviewer: Bold and not italics for emphasis, per our style

```suggestion
To create a constraint violation, use the [`ALTER PARTITION`](alter-partition.html) statement to tell the [ranges](architecture/overview.html#architecture-range) in the `europe_west` partition that they are explicitly supposed to **not** be in the `region=europe-west1` locality:
```

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
ALTER PARTITION europe_west of INDEX movr.public.users@users_pkey CONFIGURE ZONE USING constraints = '[-region=europe-west1]';
~~~

Once the statement above executes, the ranges currently stored in that locality will now be in a state where they are explicitly not supposed to be in that locality, and are thus in violation of a constraint.

> In other words, we are telling the ranges "where you are now is exactly where you are *not* supposed to be". This will cause the cluster to rebalance the ranges, which will take some time. During the time it takes for the rebalancing to occur, the ranges will be in violation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, this tells the ranges that "where you are now is exactly where you are **not** supposed to be". This will cause the cluster to rebalance the ranges, which will take some time. During the time it takes for the rebalancing to occur, the ranges will be in violation of a constraint.
```

Author: Fixed

The critical nodes endpoint should now report a constraint violation in the `violatingConstraints` field of the response, similar to the one shown below.

{{site.data.alerts.callout_success}}

> You can also find out more information about the ranges that are in violation of constraints using the [`SHOW RANGES`](show-ranges.html) statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use the [`SHOW RANGES`](show-ranges.html) statement to find more information about the ranges that are in violation of constraints.
```

Author: Fixed

            }
          ],
          "nextReplicaId": 8,
          "generation": "40",
          "stickyBit": {
            "wallTime": "0",
            "logical": 0,
            "synthetic": false
          }
        },
        "config": {
          "rangeMinBytes": "134217728",
          "rangeMaxBytes": "536870912",
          "gcPolicy": {
            "ttlSeconds": 14400,
            "protectionPolicies": [
            ],
            "ignoreStrictEnforcement": false
          },
          "globalReads": false,
          "numReplicas": 3,
          "numVoters": 0,
          "constraints": [
            {
              "numReplicas": 0,
              "constraints": [
                {
                  "type": 1,
                  "key": "region",
                  "value": "europe-west1"
                }
              ]
            }
          ],
          "voterConstraints": [
          ],
          "leasePreferences": [
          ],
          "rangefeedEnabled": false,
          "excludeDataFromBackup": false
        }
      },
      ...
    ],
    "unavailable": [
    ],
    "unavailableNodeIds": [
    ]
  }
}
~~~

##### Replication status - under-replicated ranges

> The following example assumes you are running a fresh, local [`cockroach demo`](cockroach-demo.html) cluster started using the following command:

Reviewer: Ditto

Author: Fixed

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
cockroach demo --geo-partitioned-replicas --insecure
~~~

By default, this geo-distributed demo cluster will not have any [under-replicated ranges](ui-replication-dashboard.html#under-replicated-ranges).

> To force it into a state where some [ranges](architecture/overview.html#architecture-range) are under-replicated, issue the following [`ALTER TABLE ... CONFIGURE ZONE`](alter-table.html#configure-zone) statement, which tells it to store 9 copies of each range underlying the `rides` table.

Reviewer: Suggesting a word change to be less ... forceful here; feel free to use another one.

Also, it's not immediately intuitive (to me) why this makes ranges under-replicated. It might help to mention the current number of copies (3...?) from which the cluster has to up-replicate to 9. Sorry if I've totally misunderstood what's going on here.

```suggestion
To put the cluster into a state where some [ranges](architecture/overview.html#architecture-range) are under-replicated, issue the following [`ALTER TABLE ... CONFIGURE ZONE`](alter-table.html#configure-zone) statement, which tells it to store 9 copies of each range underlying the `rides` table.
```

Author: SGTM re: word change

I think it's either 3 or 5 in this cluster by default - no you've totally understood!

it only makes them that way temporarily while they up-replicate to 1 on each node

another scenario could have been: set `num_replicas` to 18 on a 9-node cluster, which constraint cannot physically be met

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
ALTER TABLE rides CONFIGURE ZONE USING num_replicas=9;
~~~

> Once the statement above executes, the cluster will rebalance so that it's storing 9 copies of each range underlying the `rides` table. During the time it takes for the rebalancing to occur, these ranges will be considered under-replicated, since there are not yet as many copies (9) of each range as you have just specified.

Reviewer: Just to note that the above comment would also help to clarify this paragraph.

The critical nodes endpoint should now report a constraint violation in the `underReplicated` field of the response.

{{site.data.alerts.callout_success}}

> You can also find out more information about the under-replicated ranges using the [`SHOW RANGES`](show-ranges.html) statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use the [`SHOW RANGES`](show-ranges.html) statement to find more information about the under-replicated ranges.
```

Author: Fixed

> Once the statement above executes, the cluster will rebalance so that it's storing 9 copies of each range underlying the `rides` table. During the time it takes for the rebalancing to occur, these ranges will be considered under-replicated, since there are not yet as many copies (9) of each range as you have just specified.

Reviewer: Suggesting this word change now that you've confirmed I correctly understood this...

```suggestion
Once the statement above executes, the cluster will up-replicate so that it's storing 9 copies of each range underlying the `rides` table. During the time it takes for the rebalancing to occur, these ranges will be considered under-replicated, since there are not yet as many copies (9) of each range as you have just specified.
```

            }
          ],
          "nextReplicaId": 6,
          "generation": "48",
          "stickyBit": {
            "wallTime": "0",
            "logical": 0,
            "synthetic": false
          }
        },
        "config": {
          "rangeMinBytes": "134217728",
          "rangeMaxBytes": "536870912",
          "gcPolicy": {
            "ttlSeconds": 14400,
            "protectionPolicies": [
            ],
            "ignoreStrictEnforcement": false
          },
          "globalReads": false,
          "numReplicas": 9,
          "numVoters": 0,
          "constraints": [
            {
              "numReplicas": 0,
              "constraints": [
                {
                  "type": 0,
                  "key": "region",
                  "value": "europe-west1"
                }
              ]
            }
          ],
          "voterConstraints": [
          ],
          "leasePreferences": [
          ],
          "rangefeedEnabled": false,
          "excludeDataFromBackup": false
        }
      },
      ...
    ],
    "unavailable": [
    ],
    "unavailableNodeIds": [
    ]
  }
}
~~~

##### Replication status - ranges in critical localities

> The following example assumes you are running a fresh, local [`cockroach demo`](cockroach-demo.html) cluster started using the following command:

Reviewer: Ditto

Author: Fixed

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
cockroach demo --geo-partitioned-replicas --insecure
~~~

> By default, this geo-distributed demo cluster will not have any critical [nodes](architecture/overview.html#node). A node is 'critical' if removing that node were to result in [replicas](architecture/overview.html#architecture-replica) becoming unavailable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, this geo-distributed demo cluster will not have any critical [nodes](architecture/overview.html#node). A node is _critical_ if removing that node would result in [replicas](architecture/overview.html#architecture-replica) becoming unavailable.
```

Reviewer: This slightly differs from the earlier description, which is about nodes becoming unreachable. That seems to cover more scenarios. If it's accurate, I'd suggest using the same verbiage here.

Author: k, updated to use the same language here

The status endpoint describes which of your nodes (if any) are critical via the `criticalNodes` field in the response.

> To artificially put the nodes in this demo cluster in 'critical' status, we can issue the following SQL statement, which uses [`ALTER TABLE ... CONFIGURE ZONE`](alter-table.html#configure-zone) to tell the cluster to store more copies of each range underlying the `rides` table than there are nodes in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To artificially put the nodes in this demo cluster in "critical" status, we can issue the following SQL statement, which uses [`ALTER TABLE ... CONFIGURE ZONE`](alter-table.html#configure-zone) to tell the cluster to store more copies of each range underlying the `rides` table than there are nodes in the cluster.
```

Author: updated
